Understanding Media
 What is your favourite TV programme? What do you like listening to on
 the radio?  Which newspaper or magazine do you usually read? Do you
 surf the internet and what have you found most useful about it? Did you
 know that there is one word that is often used to collectively refer to
 the radio, TV, newspapers, Internet and several other forms of
 communication. This word is media . In this chapter, you will read
 more about the media. You will find out what is required to make it
 work, as well as the ways in which the media affects our daily lives. Can
 you think of one thing that you have learnt from the media this week?
Everything ranging from the stall at the local fair to
 the programme that you see on TV can be called
 media. Media is the plural form of the word medium
 and it describes the various ways through which we
 communicate in society. Because media refers to all
 means of communication, everything ranging from
 a phone call to the evening news on TV can be called
 media. TV, radio and newspapers are a form of media
 that reaches millions of people, or the masses, across
 the country and the world and, thus, they are called
 mass media.
 Media and technology
 It would probably be difficult for you to imagine your
 life without the media. But cable television and the
 widespread use of the Internet is a recent
 phenomenon. These have been around for less than
 twenty years. The technology that mass media uses
 keeps changing.
 Newspapers, television and radio can reach
 millions of people because they use certain
 technologies. We also tend to discuss newspapers
 and magazines as the print media; and TV and radio
 as the electronic media. Why do you think
 newspapers are called print media? As you read
 further, you will find that this naming is related to
 the different technologies that these media use. The
 following photographs will give you a sense of the
 ways in which technology that mass media uses has
 changed over the years and continues to change.
 Changing technology, or machines, and making
 technology more modern, helps media to reach more
 people. It also improves the quality of sound and the
 images that you see. But technology does more than
 this. It also changes the ways in which we think about
 our lives. For example, today it is quite difficult for
 us to think of our lives without television. Television
 has enabled us to think of ourselves as members of
 a larger global world. Television images travel huge
 Look at the collage on the left and
 list six various kinds of media that
 you see.
 An artist s impression of Gutenberg
 printing the first sheet of the Bible.
 Ask older members of your family
 about what they used to listen to
 on the radio when there was no
 TV around. Find out from them
 when the first TV came to your
 area. When was cable TV
 introduced?
 How many people in your
 neighbourhood use the Internet?
 List three things that you know
 about some other part of the
 world from watching television?
 With electronic typerwriters, journalism
 underwent a sea-change in the 1940s.
 John L. Baird sits in front of the
 apparatus with which he demonstrated to
 the Royal Institute, his invention, the
 televisor , an early television.
 Can you list three different
 products that are advertised
 during your favourite TV
 programme?
 Take a newspaper and count the
 number of advertisements in it.
 Some people say that newspapers
 have too many advertisements. Do
 you think this is true and why?
 distances through satellites and cables. This allows
 us to view news and entertainment channels from
 other parts of the world. Most of the cartoons that
 you see on television are mostly from Japan or the
 United States. We can now be sitting in Chennai or
 Jammu and can see images of a storm that has hit
 the coast of Florida in the United States. Television
 has brought the world closer to us.
 Media and money
 The different technologies that mass media use are
 expensive. Just think about the TV studio in which
 the newsreader sits  it has lights, cameras, sound
 recorders, transmission satellites, etc., all of which
 cost a lot of money.
 In a news studio, it is not only the newsreader
 who needs to be paid but also a number of other
 people who help put the broadcast together. This
 includes those who look after the cameras and lights.
 Also, as you read earlier the technologies that mass
 media use keep changing and so a lot of money is
 spent on getting the latest technology. Due to these
 costs, the mass media needs a great deal of money
 to do its work. As a result, most television channels
 and newspapers are part of big business houses.
 Mass media is constantly thinking of ways to make
 money. One way in which the mass media earns
 money is by advertising different things like cars,
 chocolates, clothes, mobile phones, etc. You must
 have noticed the number of advertisements that you
 have to see while watching your favourite television
 show. While watching a cricket match on TV, the
 same advertisements are shown repeatedly between
 each over and so you are often watching the same
 image over and over again. As you will read in the
 following chapter, advertisements are repeated in the
 hope that you will go out and buy what is advertised.
 In a democracy, the media plays a very important
 role in providing news and discussing events taking
 place in the country and the world. It is on the basis
 of this information that citizens can, for example,
 learn how government works. And often, if they wish
 to, they can take action on the basis of these news
 stories. Some of the ways in which they can do this
 is by writing letters to the concerned minister,
 organising a public protest, starting a signature
 campaign, asking the government to rethink its
 programme, etc.
 Given the role that the media plays in providing
 information, it is important that the information be
 balanced. Let us understand what we mean by a
 balanced media report by reading two versions of
 the same news event given on the next page.
 The cost to advertise on a TV channel
 varies from 1,000 to 1,00,000 per
 10 seconds depending on the popularity
 of the channel and time.
 The print media offers a large variety of
 information to suit the tastes of different
 readers.
India Daily Report
 Closure of factories causes unrest
 Daily News Service
 News of India Report
 Radhika Malik | INN
 Violent protests by owners
 and workers brought the
 city to a standstill today.
 People getting to work
 could not do so on time
 because of huge traffic
 jams. The owners and
 workers are protesting the
 government s decision to
 close down polluting
 factory units. Although the
 government did take this
 decision rather hastily, the
 protestors have known for
 quite some time that their
 units are not legal.
 Moreover the levels of
 pollution in the city will be
 greatly reduced by this
 closure. Mr. Jain a well
known figure in the city
 said, 
With our city
 gradually 
becoming
 Indias s new business hub,
 it is important that it be a
 clean and green city.
 Polluting factories should
 be moved. The factory
 owners and workers
 should accept the relocation being offered by
 the government instead of
 protesting.
The closure of one lakh factories in the
 city s residential areas is likely to become
 a serious issue. On Monday, thousands of factory
 owners and workers took to the streets to strongly
 protest this closure. They said that their
 livelihoods would be lost. They say that the fault
 lies with the municipal corporation because it
 continued to issue licenses for new factories to
 be set up in residential areas.They also say that
 there were no adequate relocation efforts. The
 owners and workers plan a one-day city bandh
 to protest against this closure. Mr. Sharma, one
 of the factory owners said, The government says
 that it has done a lot to relocate us. But the areas
 they have sent us to have no facilities and have
 not been developed for the last five years.
 Are the above stories in the two
 newspapers similar? And if not,
 why not? What, in your view, are
 the similarities and the
 differences?
 If you read the story in the News
 of India, what would you think
 about the issue?
 The fact is that if you had read either newspaper
 you would only know one side of the story. If you
 had read the News of India, you would most likely
 think of the protestors as a nuisance. Their
 disrupting traffic and continually polluting the city
 with their factories leaves you with a bad impression
 about them. But on the other hand, if you had read
 the story in the India Daily, you would know that
 the protests are because a lot of livelihoods will be
 lost if the factories close because the relocation efforts
 have not been adequate. Neither of these stories is a
 balanced report. A balanced report is one that
 discusses all points of view of a particular story and
 then leaves it to the readers to make up their minds.
 Writing a balanced report, however, depends on
 the media being independent. An independent media
 means that no one should control and influence its
 coverage of news. No one should tell the media what
can be included and what should not be included in
 a news story. An independent media is important in
 a democracy. As you read above, it is on the basis of
 the information that the media provides that we take
 action as citizens, so it is important that this
 information is reliable and not biased.
 However, the reality is that media is far from
 independent. This is mainly because of two reasons.
 The first is the control that the government has on
 the media. When the government prevents either a
 news item, or scenes from a movie, or the lyrics of a
 song from being shared with the larger public, this
 is referred to as censorship. There have been periods
 in Indian history when the government censored the
 media. The worst of these was the Emergency
 between 1975 1977.
 Do you think it is important to
 know both sides of the story?
 Why?
 Pretend that you are a journalist
 for a newspaper and write a
 balanced story from the two news
 reports.
 What does TV do to us and what can we do with TV?
 In many of our homes, TV is on a lot of the time. In many ways, a lot of our impressions
 about the world around us are formed by what we see on TV: it is like a window on the
 world . How do you think it influences us? TV has different types of programmes, soap
 operas, like Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi, game shows, like Kaun Banega Crorepati, reality TV
 shows like Big Boss, news, sports and cartoons.
 Before, in between and after each programme
 are advertisements. Since TV time costs so much
 money, only those programmes that can attract
 the maximum number of viewers are shown. Can
 you think of what such programmes might be?
 Think of what are the kinds of things that TV
 shows and what it does not. Does it show us
 more about the lives of the rich or the poor?
 We need to think about what TV does to us,
 how it shapes our views of the world, our beliefs,
 attitudes and values. We need to realise that it gives us a partial view of the world. While
 we enjoy our favourite programmes, we should always be aware of the large exciting
 world beyond our TV screens. There is so much happening out there that TV ignores.  A
 world beyond film stars, celebrities and rich lifestyles, a world that all of us need to reach
 out to and respond to in various ways. We need to be active viewers, who question
 whatever we see and hear, while we may enjoy it too!
 While the government does continue to censor
 films, it does not really censor the media s coverage
 of news. Despite the absence of censorship by the
 government, most newspapers nowadays still fail to
 provide a balanced story. The reasons for this are
 complicated. Persons who research the media have
 said that this happens because business houses
 control the media. At times, it is in the interest of
 these businesses to focus on only one side of the
 story. Media s continual need for money and its links
 to advertising means that it becomes difficult for
 media to be reporting against people who give them
 advertisements. Media is, thus, no longer considered
 independent because of its close links to business.
 Besides the above, the media also tends to focus
 on a particular aspect of a story because they believe
 this makes the story interesting. Also, if they want
 to increase public support for an issue, they often
 do this by focusing on one side of a story.
 Setting agendas
 The media also plays an important role in deciding
 what stories to focus on, and therefore, decides on
 what is newsworthy. For example, the annual
 function at your school is unlikely to make the news.
 But if a famous actor is invited as the Chief Guest,
 then the media might be interested in covering it. By
 focusing on particular issues, the media influences
 our thoughts, feelings and actions, and brings those
 issues to our attention. Due to the significant
 influence it plays in our lives and in shaping our
 thoughts, it is commonly said that the media sets
 the agenda.
 Very recently, the media drew our attention to
 alarming levels of pesticides in cola drinks. They
 published reports that indicated the high level of
 pesticides and, thus, made us aware of the need to
 regularly monitor these colas according to
 international quality and safety standards. They did
 this despite the government s resistance by boldly
 declaring that colas were unsafe. In covering this
 story, the media positively helped us focus on an
 issue that affects our lives and one that we might
 not even have been aware of it had it not been for
 media reporting.
 There are several instances when the media fails
 to focus on issues that are significant in our lives.
 For example, drinking water is a major problem in
 the country. Every year, thousands of people suffer
 and die because they do not get safe drinking water.
 However, we seldom find the media discussing this
 issue. A well-known Indian journalist wrote of how
 the Fashion Week, in which clothes designers show
 their new creations to rich people, formed the front
 page headlines of all the newspapers while several
 slums were being demolished in Mumbai, the very
 same week, and this was not even noticed!
 As citizens of a democracy, the media has a very
 important role to play in our lives because it is
 through the media that we hear about issues related 
 to the working of the government. The media decides
 what to focus on and in this way it sets the agenda .
 The government can, at times, prevent the media
 from publishing a story and this is called censorship.
 Nowadays, medias close relationship with business
 often means that a balanced report is difficult to come
 by. Given this, it is important for us to be aware that
 the factual information that a news report provides
 is often not complete and can be one-sided. We,
 therefore, need to analyse the news by asking the
 following questions: what is the information I am
 learning from this report? What information is not
 being provided? From whose point of view is the
 article being written? Whose point of view is being
 left out and why?
 Social advertising
 Social advertisements
 refer to advertisements
 made by the Government
 or private agencies that
 have a larger message
 for society. The following
 is a social advertisement
 regarding crossing of
 manned/unmanned
 level crossings.
 