over again. As you will read in the following chapter, advertisements are repeated in the hope that you will go out and buy what is advertised. In a democracy, the media plays a very important role in providing news and discussing events taking place in the country and the world. It is on the basis of this information that citizens can, for example, learn how government works. And often, if they wish to, they can take action on the basis of these news stories. Some of the ways in which they can do this is by writing letters to the concerned minister, organising a public protest, starting a signature campaign, asking the government to rethink its programme, etc. Given the role that the media plays in providing information, it is important that the information be balanced. Let us understand what we mean by a balanced media report by reading two versions of the same news event given on the next page. The cost to advertise on a TV channel varies from 1,000 to 1,00,000 per 10 seconds depending on the popularity of the channel and time. The print media offers a large variety of information to suit the tastes of different readers. India Daily Report Closure of factories causes unrest Daily News Service News of India Report Radhika Malik | INN Violent protests by owners and workers brought the city to a standstill today. People getting to work could not do so on time because of huge traffic jams. The owners and workers are protesting the government s decision to close down polluting factory units. Although the government did take this decision rather hastily, the protestors have known for quite some time that their units are not legal. Moreover the levels of pollution in the city will be greatly reduced by this closure. Mr. Jain a well known figure in the city said, With our city gradually becoming Indias s new business hub, it is important that it be a clean and green city. Polluting factories should be moved. The factory owners and workers should accept the relocation being offered by the government instead of protesting. The closure of one lakh factories in the city s residential areas is likely to become a serious issue. On Monday, thousands of factory owners and workers took to the streets to strongly protest this closure. They said that their livelihoods would be lost. They say that the fault lies with the municipal corporation because it continued to issue licenses for new factories to be set up in residential areas.They also say that there were no adequate relocation efforts. The owners and workers plan a one-day city bandh to protest against this closure. Mr. Sharma, one of the factory owners said, The government says that it has done a lot to relocate us. But the areas they have sent us to have no facilities and have not been developed for the last five years. Are the above stories in the two newspapers similar?