Mr. Sharma, one of the factory owners said, The government says that it has done a lot to relocate us. But the areas they have sent us to have no facilities and have not been developed for the last five years. Are the above stories in the two newspapers similar? And if not, why not? What, in your view, are the similarities and the differences? If you read the story in the News of India, what would you think about the issue? The fact is that if you had read either newspaper you would only know one side of the story. If you had read the News of India, you would most likely think of the protestors as a nuisance. Their disrupting traffic and continually polluting the city with their factories leaves you with a bad impression about them. But on the other hand, if you had read the story in the India Daily, you would know that the protests are because a lot of livelihoods will be lost if the factories close because the relocation efforts have not been adequate. Neither of these stories is a balanced report. A balanced report is one that discusses all points of view of a particular story and then leaves it to the readers to make up their minds. Writing a balanced report, however, depends on the media being independent. An independent media means that no one should control and influence its coverage of news. No one should tell the media what can be included and what should not be included in a news story. An independent media is important in a democracy. As you read above, it is on the basis of the information that the media provides that we take action as citizens, so it is important that this information is reliable and not biased. However, the reality is that media is far from independent. This is mainly because of two reasons. The first is the control that the government has on the media. When the government prevents either a news item, or scenes from a movie, or the lyrics of a song from being shared with the larger public, this is referred to as censorship. There have been periods in Indian history when the government censored the media. The worst of these was the Emergency between 1975 1977. Do you think it is important to know both sides of the story? Why? Pretend that you are a journalist for a newspaper and write a balanced story from the two news reports. What does TV do to us and what can we do with TV? In many of our homes, TV is on a lot of the time. In many ways, a lot of our impressions about the world around us are formed by what we see on TV: it is like a window on the world . How do you think it influences us?